Another common case where CSS can
interact badly with JavaScript at least
before custom properties,
is the scrolling indicators,
often we want to apply certain effects
to indicate how far you've scrolled.
How much do you have left?
That sort of thing and previously, we had
to set a bunch of CSS through JavaScript
to update because there's no way for
pure CSS to know how far you've scrolled.
There's nothing in CSS that
gives us your scroll position.
However, we can just write a little
bit of CSS to set a scroll variable
with a percentage of how
far you've scrolled.
So what this code does here right now,
is it sets a scroll variable
to scrollTop but
that's not very useful as we've seen,
because that just gives
us a number of pixels.
What we want is a zero to one
percentage of how far you've scrolled,
that's much more reusable.
So we can do that by calculating
the maximum scroll by using scrollHeight,
scrollHeight is the entire
scrollable height of an element.
And then we subtract the actual
height of the element and
we find the height of the scrolling area.
And then we divide scrollTop
with the maximum scroll and
we get a zero to one percentage again.
Let's see how we can use that,
so right now,
we have a gradient background,
that is just fixed to 20%.
We have applied this JavaScript already,
so
we should have the scroll variable
ready and we can go here and
multiply our scroll variable,
with a percentage.
And let's see, and now the background
actually reflects how far I've scrolled.
But if I don't want this
kind of scroll indicator,
if I want to change what it looks like,
I can easily do that,
I can change the background size.
And the colors.
Let's say, I wanna make it red and
white here.
All right, I'm setting background image.
Okay, and we want to only do repeat,
actually we want no repeat, all right.
And now we have a progress bar at the top,
let's make it a little bit more
narrow because that's huge.
And then we could have a subtle
progress bar at the top.
We could even change the hue, why not?
We could have, Let's say, whoa,
We could use scroll here as well and
multiply it with.
What should we multiply it with?
Let's say, 360, so
we go through the entire range of colors.
Crazy progress bar, psychedelic
progress bar, there it is, see?
The point is,
we can do all these different things and
we did not have to touch
the JavaScript at all.
This has been fun, but some people
will be pulling their hair out,
when they see this kind of JavaScript.
I'm basically attaching a scroll
listener on the document.
And I'm just using capture true, so
that I can still use event delegation even
though the scroll event doesn't bubble,
that gives us a lot of flexibility.
But it's kind of a performance nightmare,
I am obligated to tell you,
that you should not actually
do this in practice.
You should only attach
the event listeners on elements
whose scrolling you
actually want to monitor.
In this case,
you do need to trade in some flexibility.
So, I hope that this
section demonstrated that,
By using custom properties even when you
do need to use a little bit of JavaScript,
they allow you to use the absolute
minimal amount of JavaScript.
So that you can still
write most of your CSS,
in the actual CSS code where it belongs.
I think especially because of this,
CSS variables are a revolution for
separation of style and behavior.